great uh thank you everyone this is the
uh special budget meeting of the board
of Finance for uh I almost said June
12th February 12 2025 little wishful
thinking there maybe um we'll go ahead
and call this meeting to order and
recite the Pledge of Allegiance I pledge
allegiance to the flag of the United
States of America and to the Republic
for which it stands one nation
God indivisible liberty and justice for
all thank you uh we will go on with our
agenda it's pretty simple tonight we
have uh public speak opportunities we'll
go into the budget workshop and then
adjourn um so is there any member of the
public that would like to
speak again I think we'll run through
the board of Selectmen and give them
individually an opportunity to to
contribute if they want so don't have to
speak now but you can if you
like so I see Carol I see B and uh
Samsung Eric do you want to kind of roll
us through see okay so I'm gonna share
my screen hopefully this will
work uh hold on a second do we want to
do public speak I'm gonna ask Carol and
yeah Carol anything to add public in the
public speak
portion I saw you unmute but I didn't
hear anything so assume no go ahead and
jump in if you think you do okay and
then
Bata nothing at this time thank you okay
thanks and then I see a Samsung SMG not
sure who that is smg9
okay I'm gonna guess none there uh Eric
why don't you go ahead okay well
actually um we'll go through the just
hit the board of Select minute if you
have anything to add Jeff any any
comments before we
start uh no we had reviewed this already
and made some adjustments as to how Eric
initially presented the budget to us at
our uh before our Monday meeting we had
an hour session beforehand um I was
working with Eric a little bit before to
hopefully add some clarity to the
numbers and you know make them a little
bit easier to understand for everybody
the public and the other board members
so I think uh Eric is pretty good but
you know always remembering and you guys
always always treat it like this it's a
living document so there might be some
changes that need to be made um you know
even some items that Eric might have in
there already that might get adjusted
just because of financial information
that we receive later on so
but you guys are good you know how to
handle it and I do think that Eric's
number and
his spreadsheet is is better now as of
10 minutes
ago okay uh I'll go in order Scott
anything any comments or anything else
I'm good for now thank you Mark okay
thanks and
Ann I'm fine thank you okay and I don't
see Jeff Murray so we'll go ahead and
continue Eric floor is yours okay
uh so let
[Music]
me pull
up okay hopefully you're seeing
a a
spreadsheet yeah I'm GNA start with the
mill rate calculation page because I I
think we want to start with kind of
bottom line first um and then talk
through what we have on the sheet um and
then kind of go from there um we all
know last year there were a couple
calculation errors um in the
spreadsheet um so but these numbers are
consistent with what was approved last
year as a budget that's why the column
says fiscal year
20242 approved budget
so what we're projecting is that the
total
expenditures increase from about 12.8
million to about
13.5 million that's total
expenditures and if you scroll down to
budget by entity you can kind of see the
magnitude of each of the three main
elements that make up our budget uh this
was the number I had from the end over
element
school um which is a difference of
around 381 million or
$381,000 um the ram budget increase is
$60,000 uh dollars and the increase in
the town budget is
$12,000 uh dollar you know in round
terms um which gives you a total
increase in expenditure
of
$643,000
about
5% and as a percent wise the the portion
that I'm responsible for which is the
town budget is
increasing about
2.4% um
now when you look at total estimated
Revenue you could you can see the total
estimated revenue is down a little bit
and when we get into into the Weeds on
the main budget page we can talk about
what's going up and what's going down um
the thing to keep in mind is that most
of the estimated Revenue that we get
comes from the state of Connecticut the
state of Connecticut does not have a
budget ready to go
well the governor has a budget I believe
the Senate has a budget but they're a
long time before agreeing on a final
budget So currently the biggest thing
that affects the town of Andover is that
the governor's budget uh decreases ECS
funding to the town which is the
educational cost share by about
$889,000 but he's also proposed that cut
two years in a row prior to this and um
both times the House and Senate the
finally agreed on Bill restored that
funding so I think that number may go up
by that
$889,000 value but I don't know at this
point um I as a placeholder for use of
fund balance I put in
$190,000 I think we probably actually
can use quite a bit more fund balance if
the board so chooses because I think we
had a pretty considerable
Surplus and uh we're being audited right
now so I'm hoping in a week or two I
will have a stronger number you know for
what that could potentially be and then
it's up to the board to decide how much
of that uh excess from the previous year
they want to use um from the fund
balance uh to offset the cost in the
proposed budget the line for abatements
and exemptions that has gone up
considerably but that is pending the
public a public meeting where uh
potentially the fire department is
looking to increase the value of the
abatements to fire department members um
it's been allowed by state law for a
number of years um and they've asked the
town to consider upping that um to
increase retention so um that would
increase that budget line item uh a fair
bit um the the bottom line is this
budget ends up with about
10,678 to be raised by taxes which is a
significant increase from the last uh
the last time ground um most of you
probably already know on that point if
you look at line
13 um the grand list for the first time
um in a long time is decreasing and the
grand list itself has decreased about
2% um and there are two causes of that
the first is that there hasn't been a
lot of new construction so there's not a
lot of things adding to the Grand list
and changes in federal or state law um
which granted um a much greater
exemption to disabled some disabled
veterans um is a Ed in the mill rate and
also the switch from the way Motor
Vehicles were uh you know were taxed
before has changed this year to a
straight MSRP plus a depreciation
schedule so those two things decreased
the grand list considerably um by
somewhere around six million bucks so
it's a pretty
significant uh jump and the bottom line
is when you carry that all the way
through if you had a single estimated
mill rate and we'll talk about why we're
not going to be able to do that this
year that mill rate as proposed would be
about
34.1 so that is a really large jump um
that's a mill rate increase that's
that's quite substantial so we all have
to be aware of that going
in so the reason why we can't have a
single mill rate this year is is because
the state has capped the mill rate for
Motor Vehicles in other words uh in and
we can talk about how we present this
and we may eventually want to put all
that data up here um and build it into
one you know one part of this budget but
for now we left it at the bottom because
people are are used to looking at a
single mill rate and I was concerned it
would make people more confused if we
started throwing multiple Mill rates out
there but the bottom line is to be
raised by taxes you know this is the
number of funds to be raised by
taxes um if you cap the mill
rate at 32.482947
the grand list for taxable motor
vehicles uh since you know what this
number is and you know what the cap is
and you know you're going to be overall
in the cap you can figure out how much
money which is column
d39 will be raised by motor vehicle
taxes that means everything
else gets raised by personal and real
property taxes so that's the 9. six
number and then that yields a mill rate
on personal and real property of
3429 Ms um so even greater jump than
just the
single uh for the if it was just one uh
mill rate does that make sense to
everybody because I know this is the
first time as a town we've had to deal
with a lot of towns have had split Mill
rates for multiple years but over has
not makes sense any questions from the
board of Finance on there it made sense
to me it was also explained in Eric's
email from earlier little bit me thank
you okay Joan you name yeah I mean
obviously I'm gonna have to digest it I
you know like Mark said everything made
sense I had been looking I wish I took
the time to read it but I will and is
this is one option you're saying if this
budget passed as is we would have to to
make it work we would have to go with
the split mill
rate well unless we can bring the total
mill rate for the town down to 32.4 s
which I don't think would be
practical um or we don't have an option
because the state says you cannot tax
Motor Vehicles at greater than 32.4
okay okay thank you okay so that's that
and let's talk about what
things
uh let's let's go back and be I just
want to say this before I forget because
Jeff Murray we didn't get to it at the
last meeting but I know Jeff Murray was
adamant about increasing the line item
for senior
Transportation uh to enable the town to
uh to undercoat the senior
Transportation Vehicles annually to cut
down on corrosion and pay for a scheme
to wash um and that total was about
$3500 to do those things um but we
adjourned that meeting and went to the
regular meeting before we get to that so
I just want you guys to hold that in
mind because I think the board would
probably Board of Selectmen would
probably want you to include that in the
budget which would increase it
somewhat okay everybody with me so far
yes Joan has a question sorry just one
more question on what you did say I'm
sorry I just couldn't find my notes when
you were because you know you know a
couple of us have been at the board of
Selectmen two budget hearings already so
I kind of had things in my head before
that I would have brought up and now
I'll I'll redirect but your your number
that the town was going to increase by
as far as far as you know the higher you
know we we knew AES was going up 381 you
said Ram 160 and then you said the town
in round numbers will be increasing
102 that's a big change from what you've
been presenting previously so did we
factor in something that we're not aware
of because I you know in my notes it it
was over 200 thou like 280,000 I thought
well so there were two things
um one we had a calculation error in one
of the previous spreadsheets and two
before the board of Select at the board
of
selectman's last
meeting uh the board decided to uh
remove the extra
$40,000 that the wre commission was
hoping to get to update the backboards
um and they took some additional money
out of out of the capital budget so um
total they decreased the budget or in
round numbers about $80,000 and the rest
was a calculation uh perfect thank you
Eric because I knew you know that was a
high number I knew there was some errors
you were going to make so that was a
result of the corrections that you made
okay yeah thank you so deductions yeah
yeah so let's talk a little little bit
about what things um you know what are
the big causes because I I'm not
conversent enough in the school budget
to make any commentary about that I want
to talk strictly about the town budget
um so overall the town budget is an
increase of about
2.4% um you know
so moderately reasonable you can make a
decision whether that's accept cble to
you or not as a board and and we can
talk about the details so within that
overall Town budget the capital portion
of the budget decreases about
6% um or about
$75,000 as proposed and the operating
part of the town's budget increases
around
$180,000 so up in the operating down in
the capital netting out to you know just
over $100,000 $112,000 in the town
budget so what are the contributing
factors um first and foremost you know
the the town runs somewhere around a uh
million
doll um you know in person in direct
salary so if you take a 3% raise as your
kind of Baseline that would be about a
$30,000 increase
um roughly to the town total Personnel
costs and we can look at it later
there's a tab that's that's specifically
for employee costs that rolls into the
rest of the
budget there are so so the but the
overall salary increase is on the books
currently at about a 7% increase so what
are the contributing factors to that um
you know the the largest single
contributing factor of that is uh the
proposal to make the senior center
director a full-time
position the number two the second
largest one that's about a
$116,000 you know difference the
proposal to make one of the Public Works
employees from a maintainer one to a
maintainer 2 that's about a $122,000
change um the increase for the senior
center
assistant um and then a
stipend uh for the finance assistant so
those that comprises the majority of the
difference
between uh the what a 3% increase and
what the total increase that's proposed
are just just the point of just for the
board for reference you don't have to
necessarily memorize all this Eric
summarized this it his email if you
hadn't had a chance to look at it you
can look back at it and it's all there
so go ahead sry so the other thing is
that there's a total benefit benefits
increase this year of
23k um which works out to about a 5%
increase um there's there's a bunch of
factors that lead to that um you know
and and there is a a uh healthc care and
murf tab in the budget that we can go
over that kind of explains and walks
through that um as most of you know the
healthc care
Consortium um which is one of the the
large contributing factors to this is uh
is has increased 8% this year per the
Consortium um and you know a lot of our
members have health care so that's one
of the contributing factors and it's
also a contributing factor that it
tracks with uh the benefits track with
total salary and so since total salary
is going up a 7% increase there's also a
larger than 3% increase in benefits
um and you know we'll have plenty of
time to dig down into the Weeds on that
does anybody have any questions on
that
Sho I know that and I want to preface
this by saying I'm only addressing a
couple things tonight because I know we
have the board of Selectmen here and
they make big decisions on salary and
things like that I don't pretend to to
want to do any of that just for the
board of Finance members that weren't at
the two previous budget meetings that a
few of us were some questions did come
up and I've already roached a couple
things in my opinion that should maybe
be looked at and you know I just want to
um what do I want to say I just want to
bring it to their attention you know my
thoughts on it I mean this is something
that I do for a living you know I work
for a town Myself and I know how things
are done so I don't know if this is the
appropriate time you know I want to say
that to Mark bringer because he wasn't
there but I did make a point the other
night at the budget um meeting just
things because I think a lot of the
budget and increases that are going to
happen across the board as we see it's
it's a big undertaking this year last
year there was a 16% increase this year
we're looking at another big increase
for the taxpayers so I feel like it's my
job to bring things forward if if
they're not agreed upon that's not my
decision but I was put on this board for
a reason you know I think if there's
specific things Joan probably the best
thing to do I mean one of the things I
think that we should keep in mind for
today's meeting and I I kind of wanted
to mention this earlier is that we
should try to Pace
ourselves I feel like a lot of meetings
so um but I think once we get to the
detail of each section and subsequent
meetings then would be the time to kind
of bring up specifics that you think
like hey I think we might want to look
at this CH potential change in this
lineup 100% but Mark what I'm saying is
I think that the things that I wanted to
bring up will only be you know I don't
think it's anything that we can decide
on I think it's decided after today and
then it's brought to us well we can
decide on line items not specific
salaries necessar yeah I'm only gonna
bring it's GNA be quick I promise but I
was prefacing that for you because you
haven't been present at the other two
meetings where a lot of people were so I
didn't want you to think I'm just diving
in so now I I was trying to keep myself
at so all I was going to say and I I'm
going to speak to this really quick like
Eric said some of the big changes are um
you know and I I am a union member and
that's how unions operate so last year
we did bring on this maintainer we
understood Jay came on we all took the
time to listen so that they could have
two groups of two guys he was hired this
has nothing I'm sure he's a great guy
sure he's a good worker anybody that's
hired in a union job generally is higher
qualified you know but comes in kind of
as the low man and then Works their way
up so all I want to say as someone that
got voted on this board and something
that came to my mind that I was
surprised that all of a sudden we would
just elevate a person to a maintainer
two generally there's a procedure that
happens there's an opening people bid on
it you get it you advance that way
through the year so our town kind of
does things a little bit different so
that was just surprising and as we're
looking for places that
might um get reduced um eventually that
was a big ask you know the guy was and
not talking about him it's just a
$122,000 what also goes along with that
is the murf and the retirement so
there's that so I had an issue with that
I think that the people that only can
decide on that are the board of
Selectmen they may only be here tonight
so I feel like it has to get out there
it has to be something that was thought
about and then we know that Jeff Murray
did bring up and I brought up at a
previous meeting too that last year we
voted on the senior center director
salary being capped for a full-time
person at
50,000 and now you know again whatever
decisions are made at a higher level I'm
speaking to management now because
they're the management Eric does their
work for for them um so the
management brought on a person for a
certain salary but part-time hours and
now they're looking to create another
full-time position so that's another big
chunk that the taxpayers are are taking
so that's a consideration um that's not
a union position so I don't feel either
way about that that's a decision that'll
have to be made
um you know and then the last thing that
I'm going to just propose to them I
promise I don't have a lot to bring
forward tonight but these are the
Personnel things are to make sure that I
know privately in emails in the past
when people get the stiens you know
everybody's getting their 3% increase I
believe it was said Eric you know I've
done this that the you know does the
stien then become part of their salary
and then the town is responsible for the
combined thing when they do the
retirement so all of these things factor
into um raises every year you know
positions get raises as 3% if someone's
getting a $66,000 stien are we also
paying murf on that or did we I thought
it was decided we didn't um so that's a
question trying to get to these quickly
in Personnel matters and then what has
to be looked at as we saw the big
increase in the health benefits that was
brought forward as far as I think it's
,000
um I feel like I've made this in private
a lot of times it needs to be out there
we understand that health insurance is a
great benefit I'm glad that we offer our
great employees health insurance when
they need it whether they need single or
they need family good I onboard people
at work I've never met a person that
didn't need insurance that signed up for
insurance they're either on their
parents policy until they're 26 or they
are you know they need it they're of age
or they're a family providing for their
families so they take insurance I feel
like it's time to look at where we could
save the town 25,000 where we're giving
this fee in Le of taking insurance which
is no other town does it I've done my
research you know Hein does it at a very
low level we just do it at such a high
level that that it works out and I'm
sorry Mark I know you don't want me to
get in the weeds but i' I've researched
this long enough and it's my only chance
to talk and appeal to the board of
Selectmen um we are actually when we pay
people in Li of insurance an amount of
$6,600 you know it goes up every year
too I want them to get a waiver I want
them to get a waiver of like
$1,000 continuously but that's 25,000
right there that you know I would like
the town to seriously consider looking
at that as a change not for these good
employees that already get it if I was
on the union side and someone offered me
$6,000 because I didn't need insurance
I'd be doing my happy dance but I just
think that we're overpaying for that
I've talked to Eric about this I used to
have conversations with Adrian people it
it adds like $6 an hour to certain
people's wages you know it's $127 a week
um you know I've done the math for every
single you know some people it gives
them a raise of almost $4 an hour it's
just a big thing so thank you Board of
Selectmen for indulging me I've sent
multiple emails to no avail but no other
town does this I've researched all our
area towns except for Hein who does that
you know minor amount so I'd be all
about a minor amount and saving the
taxpayers money there thank you that's
it
okay any other questions for Eric before
he goes
on and for the record that was a board
of selectman uh initiated thing not a
Eric Anderson initiated thing although
Fair I've been gr gratified how many
employees um have taken it um
yes
absolutely okay let's uh can we go ahead
and go back to where you were and thank
you for my moment on that I have a lot
of support let me let me ask a question
Eric where in your document does it show
so every been get to how many people
actually take advantage of that uh so if
you went
to the tab that says healthc Care Plus
murf um you can see a list of everybody
that is eligible uh for Health Care the
their Health Care
status um whether they are single family
or fee in lie of you can see that we
currently have four people that take fee
in Le of at this
point Joan we'll look at all those thank
you so much Jeff I really did research
other towns and it's not that I I want
to give them a
waiver but I think we it's get and it
goes up every year it's just getting to
the point of so high
um that you know and it's it's really
increasing a lot so thank
you the only the only thing that I would
say to you and that we need to look at
and I'll do the math is that if those
four individuals took healthare at the
level they could what is the total cost
we in I it there uh Jeff but as someone
that enrolls people no one is going to
because they're going to pay out so much
more by taking it and if they need it
that's a gamble I'd be willing to take
you know if people need it you may get
three employees in a row that need it
then you get three that don't okay I'll
take a I'll make sure we take a look at
it
thanks okay um in terms of other notice
notable
increases uh we did adjust today the
resident trooper line item up um so
Trooper Brett cook uh has been selected
as the next uh resident state trooper um
for the town of Andover um he's
definitely more senior overall than
Sebastian Nessie was um so the state
police did give us a their budget office
did give us an estimated cost for him
next year of
$153,000 which I then substitute into
the budget so that is an increase over
what we had a lot last year of 133 uh
almost
$144,000 um I would caution you though
that all of those numbers are subject to
change because they never completely
decide what their indirect rate and what
costs are going to be assigned to that
Trooper until very late in the budget
year um and often after uh July one
so but that's the the best uh best
estimate I have for the cost of that um
the other thing that's a significant
change is the cost of the brush pile
removal um many of you know we've had
that discussion in years past whether we
make that a Permanent Fund and fund part
of the cost every year because we tend
to only grind the brush pile either
every second or third year but it's
starting to get pretty big so by the
time July rolls around we will
definitely be needing to uh do the brush
pile so that line item is either zero or
$8 to $20,000 and it keeps going back
and forth this year happens to be the
the
$118,000 uh one so that that's a pretty
big jump in the budget so in terms of of
big
chunks that is the majority of it um so
what I would like to do is just really
quick so when you start looking at the
spreadsheet itself you kind of
understand uh how this works is that
you're currently we're on the mill rate
calculation page which is kind of the
the bottom line numbers for the town um
the first tab in line is the main budget
tab um and if you remember we all got
beaten up a little bit last year about
not actually corresponding to the
columns that the charter required so
this this looks a little different than
last year but these are the columns
required by the charter I had the the uh
treasure put it in that
format um so the first part of it is the
income stream
um those are broken down into property
tax and everything related to property
tax this number in blue is there because
it's linked to the previous sheet this
number flows from the mill rate which
calculates how much current
taxes you know we have to generate um
the other thing to keep in mind is we
have to certify a grand list in uh you
know by February
1st but then a lot of things happen that
affect the
final uh set of bills that go out to
customers so we set a mill rate based on
this but in the intervening time we may
get more veterans exemptions that fill
into that and we may people may add
Motor Vehicles which may
increase um you know or there may be
things that that decrease that so even
though the mill rate is based on the
grand list as of February when the the
actual bills go out they don't always
total up to exactly this number because
the final things on the grand list as of
J July one are always a little little
different than what is on the grand list
at uh you know earlier in the year in
February when it's done okay so I just
want to make that
clear so the other thing on here is that
uh Cheryl has asked to uh remove some of
the um some of the grant funding that we
were accounting for in the main budget
because she feels that money is going
into permanent funds that roll over
anyway or multi-year funds and shouldn't
be part of this budget so that that's
kind of her guidance there's a little
bit of that uh built into this budget it
doesn't make a huge difference um the
other thing in terms of lost revenue is
the fact that we are not uh working with
Veil East anymore so the amount we're
receiving for rentals um that we're an
anticipating is down pretty
significantly uh versus
before so investment
interest um it appears right now that
we're on track to collect more than what
we're proposing in
interest um by 20 or so
thousand but that's a very variable
Target because we don't know what the
feds are doing to the interest rate and
that affects the interest we get from
the stiff account so this is hopefully a
relatively conservative estimate of what
our investment interest will be uh in
this year anybody have questions on
that um other thing to keep in mind um
as far as I know the the board of
Selectmen is not uh considering
increasing the fee for the transfer
station um that is something they they
could look at if they so chose if they
wanted to increase revenues um and the
same thing with uh fees for building and
land use you could increase the
relative uh cost of BU building permits
if the town so chose if they wanted to
bring in more income to offset some of
the increased
expenses okay so big expenses
uh you know these are the education
budgets they are uh you know those are
fairly substantial um but they are what
they are and they're not something that
I have any control of um you the board
of Finance can make whatever decisions
relative to that um they want so that's
the major part of uh or or that The
major portion of Revenue um under
expenses these two combined is about two
thirs of the total budget are wrapped up
in those two line items basically $9
million um so that's a fairly
significant uh thing we have to deal
with um enrollment is
increasing at Andover Elementary
School at
Ram the
uh Town's Levy percentage decreased just
a little bit this year which helped our
numbers uh but when we account for the
ram education number from last year this
4,150 that in that number included money
that they were giving back to the town
from their unexpended Surplus
um so their actual budget their budget
budget was higher but their budget minus
what they were returning to us um
brought brought it down to that value I
don't know whether they're going to
consider that again that may decrease
that number but I don't know I haven't
seen any indication that their board is
contemplating doing that um they could
be doing it in the next couple weeks
because they just released the ram audit
um which I can forward to the board if
you guys want to see that um questions
up to that
point just a comment Eric so we have
next week we have uh the AES district
will be presenting their budget on our
meeting on the 19th uh and we'll try to
get Colin sometime to maybe stop in and
just go over the quick uh quick review
of The Ram budget as everyone I think
knows that's voted on separately from
our budget but
uh just so we have that opportunity to
hear from him so I did ask Colin to
present at the meeting that I am going
to miss in March I think I had forwarded
that to you um I can get you the date of
that I don't know it off the top of my
head and he replied that he would be
available there if you wanted to bump
them up I'm sure he could probably
accommodate that yeah I don't remember
seeing a copy of that but yeah sometime
third week in March or second week in
March I'm not sure but okay
yeah I think it was the second week of
March yeah Mark I I had thought that um
the superintendent had asked to come in
March March 19th did you say next oh I'm
sorry you may be right Joan yeah so I
don't think we're expecting and over
Elementary yeah it was it was much later
because we're waiting for them to
finalize right yep yeah yeah yeah yeah
I'm sorry good catch yeah no problem
okay okay so um and now I just want to
talk to you about structurally how this
budget is developed so when you're
looking at this spreadsheet and we'll
have plenty of time to go over every
last line item in the main budget but I
just want to talk to you about kind of
how everything flows through this
because there's a lot of tabs in this
budget um there is a main employee cost
tab which lists all of the
employees um although you'll notice
there's a couple things where the uh the
cells are merged one of them is the
senior
Transportation uh drivers because I find
it's easier to just track total dollar
driver hours in a year and base the
budget off of that because all the
drivers make the same amount of money so
uh that's that this sheet lists
everybody and it's colorcoded by what
their arrangement
is uh with the
town so if you see uh you know it's
colorcoded elected officials as you know
the salary for elected officials is a
board of Finance
decision um ultimately the board of
Selectmen has to approve Union contract
so the light tan are those people that
are subject to a Union contract um the
old the green ones are employees that
are basically hovering right at the
minimum wage uh
so we hope the increase that we have
built into this budget will keep them
above minimum wage when minimum wage
changes next January so um but we're not
sure because we don't the state doesn't
announce what the new minimum wage is
it's indexed off of inflation so
depending on what inflation was there's
a chance those employees will get a
little bit of a bump
uh you know that's not accounted for um
in this budget so uh does anybody have
any questions about how that's developed
the board of Selectmen has made a
decision that they uh for the non-union
employees that the the target is a 3%
salary raise so that is what's what's
built into pretty much all of these
unless somebody has a prior uh uh a
standalone
contract um in which case then the terms
of the contract
Prevail okay so that's yep just a quick
question sorry my eyes AR gonna see I
and this is very quick I know that the
the town clerk had resigned and that's
an elected official
so um and I know there's there's
thoughts and talks you know from the
other evening of what might happen are
we or will the board of Selectmen decide
whether they keep the full salary in
this budget thing or they reduced it
based on I don't know is that a factor
at all or we're just keeping a
placeholder at this point so at this
point I'm just keeping a placeholder I
put a little note that I'm waiting on a
board of selectman decision how that
plays out okay um so I did not include
since we're going from a town clerk that
has been here a really long time and was
getting a longevity bonus for that from
the board of Finance I made the
assumption that since we're not going to
be able to hire
or elect a town clerk that has
experience that that you probably
wouldn't reissue that so I took that out
of the budget I left the
salary uh intact okay um and the board's
going to have to decide you know how
they want to proceed on that that's not
something I have any no thank you yeah I
just wondered how we how that was going
to be handled so you covered that I know
there's
that's depends thanks okay so you go
from employee cost to down to the next
tab over which is Healthcare Plus
murf um and these then are only the
people that are eligible for uh either
retirement or health
care you know or both um in this case we
don't have any employees in that 20 to
26-hour non-union category that would be
eligible for murf but not eligible for
uh um for Healthcare um you can see in
column o the status of uh everybody now
sorry as you as you touched on that can
you clarify for
us is it up over 25 hours they're
eligible for insurance now is that the
cut
off so yes over 26 hours is eligible for
health insurance there is one exception
to that M that is there's one Union
employee that had it already prior to
the previous Union contract right um and
the union was not willing to give that
up so that employee rain okay she got
grandfathered in I'm just yeah just for
the rule and then for murf you were just
you just said it I'm just making little
notes again for murf is 20 hours or more
yes and that is state law that is not
something the town can
modify um going for board there is the
legislature and the state comproller
office have been uh Wheeling around a
proposal to come up with a new tier for
murf that's available for towns for new
employees um if you look at the murf
town uh contribution currently it's
16.71% um which sounds exorbitant
but the problem is that similar to the
state of
Connecticut uh having radically
underfunded the retirement plans for
state employees which is under
uh underfunded by around $40 billion
doar right now Statewide the murf
program the municipal enti retirement
program is underfunded by about a
billion dollars
so yeah with a b um wow so of that
16.71% only about
5% basically is actuar for somebody
that's employed right now and the 11% is
making up for the fact that they
underfunded the thing so dramatically in
the past um so just so you're all aware
of that unfortunately the town really
doesn't have any practical way to break
right the murf contract um I know I
looked into it when I first be worked
for the town because I would have much
preferred just a
401k instead of murf but that's just
Eric and I had researched that too just
real quick because this is the only
night on this trying to see because I
know a lot of towns have gone into the
401K or defined you know yep toine
contribution just to save money so it's
something that right I I'm not even
going to go there I know we have a small
amount of employees but that's
interesting so you can't get out of it
even if you wanted
to no um multiple towns have tried to
get out of murf um and the state of
Connecticut uh has sued them over it and
sobody so far nobody's prevailed against
the state in court um in fact the town's
labor attorney um is involved in suing
the state over multiple ones for
multiple towns but so far I don't
believe they've been successful um and
his advice
was don't try it then that's my
follow-up question was why it was so
important at the time with those stiens
that people earned like if that is
really considered their wages you know
that's not for the job and if murf gets
taken out of that too but again these
are weeds that I went down before and I
thought they were taken care of but
thanks
Eric okay so the next tab over is uh
employee
benefits and so you'll see a lot of
pages that look like this so for for
most of the major categories in the
major budget there's a subsequent page
like for instance if you went to the
administrators tab you would see the
line items for the admin istrator in all
the budgets and these line items are
linked in flow directly to the budget so
at some point when the board of Finance
takes over the control of this
spreadsheet as you're producing your
final budgets just remember that this is
where you make the
changes um except like for instance if
you look at salary the salary for these
positions are linked back to that
original employee cost
okay and then when you get to the
employee
benefits these all pretty much link most
of these link back to the healthc Care
Plus murf um which is how those are
calculated so again you would make the
changes in employee cost that employee
cost change would trickle directly into
the Healthcare Plus murf
page which would flow into the employee
benefits which would show up on the main
budget so just be aware that these
spreadsheets are all totally
interconnected between the the
sheets um and you can kind of tab
through so those the employee cost to
healthc care to employee benefits kind
of move
linearly um you know if if that makes
sense and then from from there on over
these are all the subtabs that the town
has uh in the budget that link to the
main budget sheet and part of the reason
we do this is we give the individual
department heads their own budget sheet
to fill out um and then that data gets
put into here and should show up
seamlessly in the main budget um so
administrators tab this is the finance
office tab there's one for the town
clerk again um you know we don't I don't
think the board has made any final
decisions about when or how that's going
to be uh be done um although the board
did indicate that they wanted to uh see
whether we could have a Employment
contract with Carol so she can continue
to assist in the town clerk's office
even though she's officially resigned as
the town clerk
um and you know that will be subject to
negotiation yeah Eric the the assistant
town clerk is I and I heard talk of her
the other night has she been on board
for like a couple months
now uh or longer not quite two months
just
about okay thank you yep so tax
collector um that's that one so tax
collector
assessor um you know there are some
increases in both qds and vision um this
time around um and also if you look on
here it says what things are calculated
directly so we went in in one of the
things the board of Selectmen had asked
us before was to put it so that you
could look at a department budget and
that in included all the costs of the
department budget uh so this sheet shows
for that employee what the total cost is
for that department for the salary it
shows the Social Security and Med health
and dental and retirement so you have
all of that in one shot within the the
sub budget so if you want to get at uh
total cost for that department this is
kind of where you can can see
it um so the registar
office the elections and most of in most
of these cases the notes Here came from
the Department they weren't generated by
me they're what we asked all the
Departments to give us a proposed budget
and then also
explain um you know in detail and I'm
happy to share all of that with with the
board of Finance if you want to review
all the individual requests you
certainly can just depends how much
information uh you want to have so
there's one for
elections um building
department can I ask a question on all
these got his hand on one quick thing
your murf number yeah murf number is
wrong there but this murf number is
calculated separate of the main budget
so this doesn't um but yeah I already
noticed that's
15.85 and they just announced the new
number so we will correct that we
corrected it on the main page but this
doesn't affect this is calculated
separately from
the what's on the main budget so what's
on the main budget is right okay so just
so everybody understands the murf number
comes from the healthc care and the murf
tab the main employee cost tab these are
just summaries for the Departments but
you want to make number correct so you
got to change that formula and that
number so that the board of Finance
understands the the totals yeah looks
like it looks like it's hardcoded in
each tab so you're probably gonna have
to either yep we'll have to go through
put in a lock cell somewhere or do them
all yeah yep
yep uh
so Library um library is a little
different um
because every year they kind of mix and
match with employees so we try to
calculate payroll based on like the
total number of hours are going to work
because they really only almost all
their employees make the same amount
with the exception of Amy orasi who's
the director of the library and they
have a children's librarian but the
amount of time they allot to the
children's librarian isn't that much so
we take care of that separately and then
we just figure Global hours for Library
operations
um
so civil prep um I would suggest we up
the salary for civil prep um because I
think that's an area where we've been
consistently underfunded and we're now
we
got we got enough grant funding for
civil preparedness last year because of
a because our
existing uh
Emergency Management communication
person submitted all the correct
paperwork to the state that her salaries
essentially paid out of uh paid from the
grant money that that we got from
Department of Emergency Management
Services um I'm leaving this $1,000 in
the shared s vehicle because that's kind
of what they asked for um so as many of
you know we share a uh or we have a
combined cir team the town of Andover
with the town of Hein and the town of
maloro so they trained together um they
were using this really ratty old
ambulance that uh the town of Hein had
gotten rid of but but I believe Hein
used some of their C their covid funding
and bought them a brand new vehicle for
the uh C team that's technically hein's
vehicle but I know it's been shared so
we have to at least be willing to help
them out for maintaining that um and
it's a fairly small budget
overall so of the large
budgets Public Works is one of the
uh the largest budgets so this comment
is correct incorrect for the board of
Selectmen that was taken back down to
3% um but it was I did it in the in the
salary tab so the number should be
correct it was just the note was was old
and we will go back and address because
I think all of these have uh probably
the wrong mult applier for retirement in
murf um snow removal um we as you guys
probably remember about two years ago or
three years ago we decreased pretty
significantly um both the
overtime um and uh knocked the salt
budget down a little bit um we've we've
held pretty steady um it's going to be a
little inter interesting because this
year we've plowed more than the previous
two but so far it looks like we're still
reasonable on both the the snow plow the
plow removal overtime budget um and the
sand and salt budget which are the main
things that are part of uh snow
removal transfer station um so among the
the areas where there was a fairly big
bump in this is the cost for the
compactor
lease um so I've been aware for the last
five years as the Town Administrator
that uh Willie waste which then became
cassella owned two of the three
compactors we have at the transfer
station but they've been charging us for
four years for a single
compactor um cassella finally ra
realized that we had two um and started
charging us for both of them so that has
increased that's basically doubled the
contractor Le or the compactor lease
line item uh in that which accounts for
most of the the increase there so again
Rob's got his hand up just really quick
question Eric um what are those things
cost yeah I was just thinking the same
thing um I
think you know a few years ago we were
asking that question and we were looking
around to see whether we were looking at
a used one that was around
30,000 and I seem to recall they were
somewhere in the
$60,000 range to to purchase one yeah so
but don't quote me on that those are old
numbers and I may be misremembering them
anyway but yeah it is something you know
we should be thinking about and now that
they're actually part of the reason why
I didn't want to pursue it was because
they were only charging us for half of
our compactors anyway so I was in the
let sleeping dogs category well now now
the jig's up so
yeah you know definitely something to
look at now that's that's it that's on
my that's my commentary yep uh
custodian um so we only have a single
line for
custodian and we don't suballocate
this to three
locations because uh our custodian
Willie Bell and his wife Susie uh
actually clean three buildings they
clean the town hall they clean the
library and they clean the community
center um but just so we didn't have to
screw around with essentially three
separate time cards for each location
we've kind of lumped it into one lumps
some custodian and we have a custodian
line item in the main budget we don't
sub break it out into what it cost to
clean the town hall what it cost to
clean the community center what it cost
to clean the
library Eric can I ask a can I ask a
question Eric
absolutely so I'm sorry I'm sure this is
probably a simple answer but on the
previous um
page um tipping these what yeah what
tipping fees what is
that all right so uh hauling fees is
every time they got to drive in here
pick up one uh shipping container or one
uh container and bring it back to willly
waste and then bring it back to here we
get a per per trip fee um and then we
get charged for bulky waste in one
category um so that's not the cost to
haul the bulky waste away that's the
cost to get rid of the bulky waste and
that bulky waste goes to uh uh what do
you call it it gets shipped out to Ohio
and it goes in a landfill in Ohio
believe it or not um the the Tipping
fees are the cost
uh
for um what do you call it that's that's
the cost for like basically not bulky
waste but garbage and
recycling oh wow just to emptying
basically so it's not the hauling fee
that's the cost so we get
charged comes and go we get charged
separately to haul it and separately to
leave it correct correct um yes you know
and then and then yeah yeah so it's it's
not an insignificant fee by any means um
the transfer station expensive to
operate yeah and there's no no other way
to negotiate a contract somewhere else
or is that a not practically because in
terms of the
uh locally cassella is the biggest
recycling
uh Center and we actually negotiate our
contracts with cassella through
something called mid
Nero which is the midn Northeast
Recycling Consortium of which uh 13
towns sit on the board of that I am
andover's representative for that so we
go out collectively every year for our
contracts for uh hazardous waste
recycling tires you know you name it all
the things that a transfer station has
and then you know we we we negotiate a
lot of the stuff in bulk with Cella um
so the the individual towns the con that
sign a contract with Cella are relative
to this so pretty much everybody in this
area is using cassella um the only thing
we could potentially do is if we owned a
tractor trailer and we were and we had a
roll on rollof we could
potentially you know haul the material
ourselves um but there's a lot of that's
also a lot of Labor um yeah so and we
need to own a tractor trailer and you
know be willing to do it so PID someone
to drive it yeah right so so that's the
only
maintain it okay thanks for that
explanation
okay uh so Fire
Marshall probably I don't know how many
of you know but we use it's not really a
shared
service um but we and the town of Bolton
um share both a fire marshal and a
deputy Fire Marshall so we pay for him
Bolton pays for him and we're actually
in a Cooperative agreement with two
other towns because you know if
something really bad happens it's
possible you need more than you know one
fire marshal or if the deput is around
and not the fire
marshal so we have reciprocal coverage
also with two other towns um as part of
this and and we we pay a pro-rated
portion of the fire marshal assist
assistant Fire Marshals mandated
training um and then dues and
subscriptions um and he does have a
little bit of an equipment
budget uh Eric can I ask you a question
certainly the custodian Services is that
done once a
week uh
so no currently Willie cleans I think he
cleans all three buildings twice a week
I know the town hall gets cleaned twice
a week um and
right now the both the community center
and uh pretty sure the library is
getting cleaned twice a week too I could
be wrong that might only be once okay
and what about the school the school has
their own custodian yeah the school has
several custodians so they're completely
separate from the town and we can't
combine
them
um I can answer that absolutely
absolutely not Willie does the best job
ever I don't know if you notice how
clean that town hall is yeah that
gentleman cares and does a phenomenal
job so please Board of Finance don't
mess with that one okay but as far as
the school goes as far as the school
goes and combining Eric didn't at one
point in time we try
that uh I think we talked about it but
certainly not in my lifetime have we
tried that I think we were discussing it
when Sally was the superintendent and I
don't think it it it came off well
Louise so okay Willie and his wife are
uh they do a phenomenal
job and the other thing to keep in mind
with with you get with Willie and with
his wife is you
get people that are very talented in a
sense that they don't do just cleaning
like if you look all those sound
attenuation bars um that the town has
put up that was all done by Willie and
Susie um a lot of the mounting a lot of
the painting that goes on they last year
they completely
Reed resp spackled and repainted the
exterior windows at the Andover Museum
um they I'm gonna say we sold
okay let's move on and try to stay out
of the weeds guys all right fair enough
so this this line item has both senior
citizens budget and Andover senior uh
transition and that is that is one thing
that's definitely an error the board of
Selectmen voted the last time to
increase that line
item so that line item is Incorrect and
let me see I'll have to see how that
propagates through but they on the
spreadsheet you sent around they doubled
it
correct I think it just got uh I think I
probably just updated on the main page
and not
here um I will check on that one yeah
I'm seeing it is uh 125 I think
yeah I'm sorry is that line five or
that Resident Senor
lunch 820 so I
mean that's since it's
doubling um have we just been under
budgeting that
thing
yes
yes yes we have and the the board of
Selectmen also made a decision that they
wanted to keep the fee schedule uh for
that as low as they could to encourage
socialization and Senior participation
in general um so and I could Supply it
to you but but basically Tess gave a
breakout of the costs of of the programs
that they're running so that the board
could make a decision how much they
wanted to fund it you know which
basically trickles Down Under the cost
for
participation gotcha uh sorry I actually
had a question and I apologize for
having you back up but um on the
transfer station when is the last time
that we
increased the sticker
fees year or two ago right it was
believe two years ago they've been $50 a
piece for two years okay so we had them
40 and we went up to 50 couple years ago
okay correct and for the record um
because the cost of that the transfer
station has been increasing the cost of
the sticker program right now is is is
paying for about 20% of the total
operating cost of the transfer
station um so it has been higher in the
past but you know the the as many of you
know since they closed the main trash to
energy plant in the state um you know
there's just so much less capacity that
everybody's been getting squeezed the
last few years no fair enough just
wanted to remind myself you know if that
was an option I don't want to go and
propose raising something that we just
raised you
know yeah I mean I sort of feel like the
the fee should bring in at least uh
25% to 30% of the cost of running the
facility But ultimately that's a that's
a board decision not a not a me decision
um you know I think the fees are
reasonable compared to what you get
certainly a lot cheaper than getting
pickup but again it's less convenient
than yeah I mean I pay for pickups so I
know I'm you know I'm pay I forget what
I pay quarterly or monthly or whatever
it is but it's it's definitely you know
a lot more so but no I don't I don't
wanna I just thank you for that that's
all I want to know you know if it was
two three years ago cool okay we we'll
look at that I'm assuming when we go
through this whole budget we're going to
be looking at a lot of things and and
that's one thing to look at thanks yep
and in terms of the senior
Transportation um at least a couple
Board of Selectmen members have wanted
to increase the vehicle maintenance line
item we did increase it last year to
this year based on our expenses although
to be honest we're going to blow through
the $9,000 model uh amount this year if
we were repair the Dodge Caravan that
has some issues currently um and one of
the board of selectman members has you
know basically wants the town to run
them through the wash pretty regularly
so we're going to try to come up with a
plan to wash the smaller ones at an
automatic car wash regularly and uh a
larger the larger ones at uh Cent tre's
um wash rack um if we do that that
budget line item has to come up about
$3500 to accomplish that I was going to
up it but the board of Selectmen never
formally said they wanted to do that so
I would hope they could make that
decision this meeting or the next
meeting so we could put that in the
budget because that is not reflected in
the main budget uh
currently um select Bud question oh I
have I have a question too go ahead can
we go back to the previous page yeah
want to just go on what he was just
talking about Lizz do you mind if I just
follow up on that with the w I know that
was a Hot Topic item the other day with
the you know the rust or corrosion
that's happening on the vehicles at the
Town garage down here there's not a
place or somewhere talk about that in
public
okay I'd be happy to talk to all of you
individually in private um about
strategies for washing the vehicle
but oh I just looked into it when I
something comes up I looked into it so
oh yeah I wasn't going to mention people
doing it I just wanted to know all right
what the facility I'll go take a tour
thank
you
understood um I have a question about
the resident services coordinator what
is that
the social services person what is that
that is so there's a couple Oddities um
in so the state has a requirement for
the towns to have a couple of
individuals to cover things related to
Social
Services um
so the the problem is the state
recommends a minimum number of hours
that person be
available um which is like 20 hours a
week um in the problem is is that we
used to have a a separate individual
that did that job um and when that
person for health reasons was no longer
able to do the
job I assigned that to an existing Town
employee um and just paid him a portion
of the cost that we had allocated
previously do that because I thought it
was more economical than having that as
a standalone um employee I just didn't
want an extra employee if I didn't have
to um and the person that's doing that
is the person that's kind of responsible
for renters rebates anyway which is one
of the programs that normally falls
under that category um you know that
also deals with when we have problems
with hoarding um that person is one of
the leads on the towns hoarding task
force um which I never knew towns had
until I became a Town
Administrator um
uh but
apparently towns have I guess yeah how
how busy is that
role so it depends it's
seasonal
um it's not hugely
busy um
but I think the reason why I wanted that
attached to an actual staff person is
because if somebody because you're per
the state you're supposed to be
supplying you're supposed to have
somebody available pretty regularly and
the only way you can have somebody
available pretty regularly is to have
that uh you know have that a staff
person because we're not going to pay
somebody you know know 20 hours a week
to sit here and and be that
person yeah okay I get that I I guess
I'm trying to understand it it sounds
like a role that somebody in the in one
of the Departments could perform which I
know somebody is I don't understand why
a separate stiping for something that
sounds like it's kind of a you have to
be there right someone has to be there
to be able to answer the call but it
doesn't sound like it might be that busy
of a
role Liz to piggyback on your question
and we're not going to attack it but
since this is our I understand and am
glad that you didn't hire a full-time
employee because I'm sure in a town of
3,000 people like Liz is saying it is a
small amount of time I just you know
sometimes wonder as I'm looking through
you know preparing for these meetings
that when someone does get a stipend um
each year it goes up for a job that's
probably minus you know not too much and
I don't want to minimize anybody's job
we all have
function and
that going
into yeah that's one of my questions so
I'm just piggybacking on you too Liz
that every year that you know the the
employees you know sometimes people
would have a stip in for like $4,000 and
it just stays there and then if a new
this is what I see happen in my
employment you know stiens don't
automatically go up all the time
everything in the town of vover is
always going up the percentage and I'm
just trying to you know our budgets are
getting bigger and bigger the increases
are getting bigger and bigger so these
are you know the things that the
contracts can't change the union things
can't change but these little things you
know there's a lot of a lot of things
that I I don't quite understand why you
know unless someone has told you Eric
that each time like that there's a new
budget they have to go up 3% too that's
all for those those smaller jobs that
people are
doing right and the reason for that is
that the only two people that are
getting stiens currently other than the
town clerk which that was a board of
Finance thing not a not a union thing um
are because both those employees are
union
employees so any additional
responsibilities that you expect of a
union
employee have to be via a memorandum of
agreement and negotiated with the Union
so those moas are separate from the
Union
contract because I always want them to
be severable in other words if the town
at some point decides like for instance
Kate has or the tax collector has a
stipend because in in addition to being
the tax collector she is also my admin
assistant so we went from two people
down to a single person um and we used
that money hopefully to be able to pay
for some construction
Administration but with the
understanding that at some
point we may decide that's not working
and we need a full-time uh not a full
full time another part-time
Administrative Assistant for me that can
be backed out of the the
contract I'd like to I'd like to request
that we kind of keep the high level view
going here it's it's getting a little
longer in the meeting we're gon have
plenty of time to hash out these details
just go along but Mark will we have time
to ask these like employee related
questions without the board of Selectmen
pres that's that's all we're really
looking for information from Eric and
ultimately the the board of SEL the
executive body and they'll make those
decisions so you know he can give us
certainly give us information you know
we'll we'll we can always manage the
line item yeah I appreciate that the
only last thing I was going to say on a
stip in matter is generally Eric and I
appreciate how you do it and break it
out we get that
usually I think that the employees are
lucky to be getting the stiens and
they're able to perform the function
within their same job hours usually when
a stien is given like when we give
stiens where where I'm employed it has
to be you know they can't be double
dipping so they can't they have to do
the stipended job outside of their
working hours so I get you're thinking
but they're already so in order of
increasing them year by year they're
already getting a big bonus of which I
understand if it's a different function
that doesn't fall within they get a stip
in for that extra job but um they get
the the the good news getting it done
within their workday whereas anybody
that gets stiens usually has to make
sure they're not double dipping and
getting it with outside thank you that's
it Mark that's all I you know this was a
topic
so just make one more one more comment
and we can move on sure good is this
something since it's such a small role
could this be moved over to the senior
center director because she she's not um
Union right right she's not Union role
could just be moved over right and that
and that fee could go away
correct you
could but I actually don't think you
have enough time available in that role
to be adding things to it now you may
have a different opinion um we could
certainly discuss that if that's the way
the board wants to go
um but that's also not in her contract
so I don't think she's necessarily going
to do it
um
yeah we can certainly consider it though
we'll talk about it and which in the
weeds again we're supposed to be high
level here okay
sure uh come on Mark Board of Selectmen
very small budget it's primarily just
the board of Selectmen does get a
stipend uh four of the five
Selectmen uh agree to get a stipend the
first selectman does not take a
stipend um Board of Finance the only
real thing in your budget these days is
board clerk
wages uh baa Board of assessment appeals
um again it's mostly just the salary for
clerks I did up the training budget a
little bit I did not get I requested
them a couple times I never did get a
formal budget for them but I know at
least one member of the baa was wanting
to take the initial
course uh for uh assessors and baa
members and I think education's
important so if one of them is willing
to step up and take the time to go
through it um I wanted to budget for
it uh plan Planning and Zoning um same
thing board clerk the the biggest line
item in here is legal and Professional
Services um that line item even though
it sits within the Planning and Zoning
commission's budget covers all of the
land use agencies so it covers zoning
Inland wetlands and uh the zoning board
of appeals um that did go up a fair bit
this year uh um you know I was trying to
get an estimate from the town zoning
attorney and what are costs go so that
you know the town is
actively uh in
litigation with a uh somebody on Route
Six the Gravel Pit operation on Route
Six um so and we expect that at some
point we may be able to recoup a lot of
our legal costs but I'm suspecting both
in the end of this budget year and the
beginning of next budget year we're
going to have have increased legal costs
for that and the
zoning uh the legal budget for the
zoning commission is separate from the
legal budget uh from the town the town
has two other attorneys that are kind of
um has a town attorney and then the uh
uh the assessor's office has its own uh
uh attorney that deals with with just
assessment
issues uh that's Planning and Zoning uh
Wetlands commission again the majority
of their budget is the cost of board
Clerk and for the record the reason why
we do board clerks for some boards but
not most boards is because the the land
use
commissions and the board of Selectmen
and the board of Finance and the board
of assessment appeals are the things
where you're most likely to get sued um
if you do something procedurally
incorrect and you don't produce good
minutes so that's why in those for all
of those boards we pay a board
clerk uh yep I was I had to go back
again but I didn't see anything uh for
training under zon board of appeals is
that something you're carrying under a
different line I know you always say
that you'll cover that when we need
training so I wasn't sure if you carry
that separately
or yeah I I actually don't think we ever
made a line item for
zoning board of appeals I'm not sure
exactly why I believe that's just in the
main budget we can go we can look or or
I can find out it is there
375 yeah but I'm just saying we don't
have a subsequent uh a separate budget
paid for that because you're you really
only had like one thing in your budget
so up to this year so we didn't have a
standalone tab for
you um and there are 32 boards and
commissions they don't all have get
their own separate tab in the budget can
I U I'd like to ask one question you had
said legal
fees um Y where where are all the legal
fees segmented here so I know Planning
and Zoning has leg and professional fees
as we're looking at it so where are the
legal fees for the
town so there is a town legal
budget um that's not separate from
there's no separate line item for that
that's just the line item in the main
budget uh and I'd have to find it it's
in there somewhere so it's just a line
item in the main budget yeah we don't
have a separate tab because it's only
there's only one line item in it so we
don't generally make a tab for a single
line item um it's essentially a it's
it's its own category but it's a
category that only has one
expense but you told us that there were
two
expenses so you told us there were legal
fees for the town attorney and you told
us there were legal fees for the
assessor's
office correct how do we identify the
split between those two
uh we
don't um so well let me back up so we
have a separate budget like if you look
at uh 237 in the main budget
page the attorney line fee has the
regular legal retainer that pays for
Dennis O'Brien the town's attorney um
occasionally I take money out of that
line item when we need to talk to our
labor attorney um and then below it is
the assessors legal um which it's not a
reval year it doesn't seem like it it's
unlikely that we're g to ex have a great
deal of legal fees this line item goes
up considerably in years where we do Ral
when we expect to get uh sued uh a few
times thank you
okay um so that's it for all the tabs
does anybody have any other overall
questions or things they want to look at
tonight Joan Eric this this is just a
quick question um with regards to our
assessor who I know is part-time does he
and I know he's covered under contract
and all of that um am I correct with
that he's in a union is he in that Mei
yep he's an meiu member okay even though
he's part-time does he so does he must
does he get murf is my question does he
get retirement from
[Music]
Handover I don't think so okay I could I
was looking at the line earlier today
that's all I I know his hours are
limited here you know when it's not
reval so okay thanks
any other questions for
Eric it's a lot to cover um I think it
was a good review I think it was helpful
to review the tabs and how this all
rolls up um you know if anyone doesn't
have access to excel I think generally
you can open these things in Google
Sheets so uh you need a Google account
to do that uh if you need something else
you know let me know or PDF prints or
something we can always work that out
Eric I think you said this has changed
from the one you sent earlier today
you're going to send an updated version
yeah it's got a couple little changes um
I might go through tomorrow and and
change how each tab uh adds in the murf
costs before I update it and send it to
the board um
okay just and just as a global thing
Eric just so I can share with the board
of Finance I mean listen on my
analysis as you guys look at this about
50% of the costs are wages benefits in
health care so as you guys take a look
so Joanne and and and you're going
you're looking in the right areas that's
where the money is 58% or 4 48.890717
of it we can't do anything because
they're contracted related to those
items but that is where the bulk of the
money is that the town spends so on line
453 when you look at at this there's
$3.2 million in town operating budget
um
1,115 th000 is Wages
$237,000 his benefits and $240,000 as
Healthcare so those are the bulk of the
money that's where it's at high level
anywhere we can focus on that and reduce
that that would assist
so figured I would just give you that
info thank
you question oh go ahead if it's okay
um I I had had a chance to go through
the whole spreadsheet um before the
meeting but um in our last CIP meeting
we heard fire department request for
significant amount of money for their
turnout gear is that reflected in this
is that that's all built in so it is
reflected in the capital I I should have
I thought I gave everybody on the board
of finance a separate Capital sheet that
just deals with the capital funds um as
they're allocated and What expenses come
out of each So currently we are putting
in that's line 43 one
um uh approximately in the fire
equipment sorry that line not the one
that's the truck yep
$137,000 that's for the lease right so
the lease is expected to be about
$125,000 but currently we have in that
account and I could bring up the other
spreadsheet and share that with you if
you guys want to see that um I think I I
did send it to you though um so that has
ballpark a little over
$400,000 in that account so if we take
out the money directly to buy the
SCBA uh for the fire department which is
the request Ci or uh
uh
what s yep um and the Fire Commission
requested um if that comes out there's
still the money for the first year and
then this line item more than covers the
least payment but it doesn't you know
there may be other things coming down
the pike that would the the fund gets
depleted is really what it boils down to
okay all right I get it correct just to
clarify Eric did that that uh Capital
fund summary was uh sent I think with K
originally sent it around on the 6th it
wasn't it wasn't today but it was with a
prior email but we did get it don't know
if any exchanged it but I don't think I
don't think we got an updated copy
that it does show the SCBA equipment on
the fire on the fire truck fund or
something right it's about 200k so but I
I do want to be very clear and what I
asked the Fire Commission to come back
to us with was an updated Capital plan
because I haven't had a full-blown cap
Capital plan from them in like three
years so the year before they proposed
the fire Tru um up to that point when
Kurt had been doing it I would get one
every year and then they really haven't
done one since um or if they have they
haven't given it to me so I've asked
them for that you know and kind of made
them aware that given what we're
budgeting right now the squad if if we
assume a 10-year lease for the squad
um over the next 10 years outside of
what they've already asked there is not
a lot of money available to them um so
that is a that is a
concern Sor are there
any sorry I don't know any of any any of
the projects that you have planned
um or remaining are those in here
somewhere that I mean I don't I don't
even know I like for one I know you
mentioned at one point getting more EV
Chargers are those reflected in here and
I mean how does that work do we pay for
them who pays for them and where are
those
reflected uh so I'm not currently
looking for more EV Chargers um oh where
did I hear that but basically what
happens is
that um so we budget to the the goal is
to make the funding from year to year to
year as similar as possible so we take a
a longer look out and we say okay let's
take Public Works equipment fund so they
have a 10-year Capital plan and it's
kind of a rolling 10-year Capital plan
so we budget for the public works
equipment fund fund based off the
10-year Capital plan um so we try to
level fund that every year because we
don't want the big Shockers like to come
back to the town and say this year we
need a million bucks for the squad and
then nothing next year and then so we've
done that across all of the major
project
funds um you know so so the ones where
most of the projects that are are being
undertaken are funded out of are either
line
429 which is the uh multi-use building
fund um or out of the building
maintenance fund so like for instance
the building maintenance fund we funded
a bunch of the HVAC improvements to the
town hall um came out of that fund for
instance we did a bunch of emergency
repairs to the electrical system so
those are like expenses that are out of
the ordinary not like the annual uh
building normal maintenance that you do
in a building every year these are
essentially project funds um the
multi-use building fund was originally
set up to fund the community center but
we were able to to spend the
majority of the equipment or do the
majority of the community center through
arpa grant funding um but that didn't
cover the kitchen and that didn't cover
finishing off the basement so um I broke
it down in the capital fund but a lot of
that money has been assigned to various
different things at public meetings
because see like whenever I get a grant
that requires a town match um that has
to go to town meeting unless it's a
really small Grant um so once the town
meeting like the town meeting agreed to
spend money out of that fund for the
town's portion of the uh work at
the uh the recreation Fields the new
playground pickle ball courts lighting
that kind of stuff so that money is it's
in that fund we already have the money
but it's earmarked so most of the money
in that fund is already earmarked for
something it's good bu okay okay um so
the the EV Chargers do how how much are
they used and what are they costing the
town just curious
so right now they're not really used at
all because basically as soon as we put
them behind the pay wall um they uh
there's been essentially zero usage of
the EV charger since we did that um it
actually costs us more and that's
something Jeff Maguire and I have had a
conversation
um before they got used a little bit but
not very much um once we put them behind
a pay wall they really haven't been used
at all it's costing us more money to pay
for the pay wall account than it would
be to not do that and just leave them
available for the public um those
Chargers were originally put in
primarily because the town was looking
at purchasing at least one electric
vehicle for senior
Transportation um but the board elected
not to do that um where we are
technically required to maintain them
because the vast majority of money to
build those came from an eversource uh
Grant um that we applied for and got for
the town so the town paid a few thousand
dollars to install them around 20,000 of
that money came from the utility company
um but technically we are supposed to
keep them available to the public does
that make so what so what does the pay
wall what does the pay wall cost
us uh I would have to look it up but
because we have two of them it's
maybe you can get back back back on that
or something Eric so yeah yeah you can
send that back that's fine okay it's a
monthly credit card charge and if I
remember it correctly it was $40 a month
or was some somewhere in the five to
$600 range so the question was the
question was get rid of the credit card
charge and then all we would sit there
and be absorbing would be the electrical
usage that somebody would use when
they're plugged in
thank
you okay do you have any other topics we
want to discuss Joanne yeah I just
wanted to kind of roll back and and Jeff
kind of alluded to this this was the
night that we were talking about
employees kind of in depth so I
appreciate everyone indulging me with
the few questions that I had um I know
we're going to be doing you know deeper
things as we go along but are we looking
at this um I don't know if the board of
selectman is still making choices or
decisions on some of the topics or are
we you know going to get are pretty much
we looking at some final this is this is
the way it's going to be I didn't know
if there's you know there used to be a
monthlong of the board of Selectmen you
know budget workshops that I used to
listen in and maybe a few Cuts would be
made here and there so I don't know what
their plan is that's all and if we're
meeting again one more time or if this
was our
meeting uh I know Mark has another one
scheduled for next week um
that I may not be able to attend that
one but I will try but to answer your
question the majority of what we've
presented to you is contractual the
biggest issue I will tell you Joanne
that we we have not agreed on is related
to um the community center and those
wages that are related to that um the
one thing that we did do was agree that
for all non-union employees uh we would
uh agree with a 3% pay increase to be
put into the budget so that it would
match our Union contracts so that we
were not in excess of our Union
contracts and then have a negotiating
point that we have to deal with later
down the road so
um I would think that that we will still
evaluate certain items and and Eric will
bringing those to you during your
regular meetings and if you guys have
any questions you're you know feel free
to pick up the phone or email um I I'm
sure we would sit there and you know
always consider anything but on the
employee standpoint um the biggest one
was the 3% raise and we agreed to that
at our meeting and then the other one
was um we have not sat there and
finalized the community center side so
that will still be discussed at the next
bard of s
meeting and I totally understand Jeff
all the union implications and respect
that you kept the 3% for the non-union
too I think that makes it nice you know
nice working environment that makes
sense I just wondered if you had already
agreed to um you know I wouldn't well I
mean I think it's important to speak on
it from my opinion the maintainer
position had that already been agreed
that that person that came in as a
maintainer one will now be elevated
because that was a big chunk of money
too well that was the hope and and that
decision was simply
because of the skill level of that
individual that was brought in initially
to be really honest Joanne that person
should have probably been brought in at
maintainer two when he was brought in
just because of his skill level but uh
the choice was made to keep him at a a
maintainer one that is something that we
still can discuss but we also have to
remember that it's really important to
consider the
the in the way that the the Department
of Public Works you know work uh crew
will will age out and so trying to make
sure that we age them in in a correct
pattern to sit there and keep building
up the skill and the pay grades for
those individuals but
um and again it's not personal and I
feel I just had to bring don't don't
worry about it is I know I need this
this is public meeting I want the people
that I know it's not personal it's just
a union thing and you know that but we
do have a small town so I'll listen yeah
correct and we we have not uh I would
sit there and tell you that this budget
in in total still needs to be reviewed
by the the board of Selectmen in some
level of detail we're not just going to
walk away from specific lineups the
majority of this is set I mean I don't
think we'll we will um pick at it in any
significant manner I mean what what
changes we made to the capital funds to
sit there and reduce the overall spend
um but we were having some spreadsheet
issues at our last meeting and we needed
to make sure that we what we were
looking at was accurate so I would
Envision that the board of Selectmen
will still uh regroup and communicate as
to the m the main issues that you've
addressed from a payroll perspective so
so we'll we'll have Eric uh relay those
those numbers if we decide that there's
changes to be
made sure appreciate it and thank you
for letting me bring it up this was the
only time appreciate it no problem sure
and you know I think it's totally
legitimate for the board of Finance to
take a hard look at uh what we're
spending you know we had a period where
the town's budget
um we were lucky in that we've gone
through a period where the education
budgets both for the elementary school
and the high school have been
contained um in in a lot of cases
decreasing um and we used that to fund a
lot of priorities the town had um and I
you know there well it may I may sound
like that there's no nothing here is set
in stone um I think both the capital
funding and the um you know and all line
items are up for you know up for
discussion um the only thing I would say
is that I did highlight in the capital
fund three
funds where I don't think we can
decrease and that is because if we
decrease those below what we have we
can't meet the obligations that we have
in terms of Public Works there's two PE
pieces of equipment that there are
leases on currently so the majority of
that budget is spoken for the same thing
will be true of the fire engine fund
when the lease for that is approved and
we get the vehicle which is presumably
sometime in the next six months and the
assumption is is that the bridge at on
Lake Road at the Sola will be part of
the 2026 construction season um and we
need the bridge and Culvert fund fully
funded this year so we have the money
actually in the budget for next
construction season when that begins so
um you know but the rest are you know
are can be looked at and and you know
there's you know it just depends where
where you think you want to know
obviously this is going to be a
extremely difficult budget year we all
know that when you start looking at a 2
mil increase you're going to have a lot
of really upset people and you know
you've got to seriously consider you
know um you know in years past when
we've had to the the board has asked me
what cuts we could minimi you know what
cuts have the least
impact and what the actual impact of
those cuts are um if we get a little
further in the budget process and you
feel that's appropriate I'm happy to do
that um but yeah it's it's going to be a
hard budget year no question about
it okay you have any other topics or
questions we want to address
now or does somebody want to make a move
for adjournment we'll pick this up again
next
week either way we'll pick it up next
week so I move to
adjourn I'll second
it okay we have a second any discussion
on that
motion okay hearing none uh the motion
passes I'd like to thank the members of
the public and the members of the board
of Finance for sticking it out um
especially the board of Selectmen
they've got to do double duty and double
pain here looking through this over and
again but we appreciate you being
available to answer questions and
provide clarification so Eric said it's
going to be a long process going to be a
tough one this year we all know it so
we'll uh we'll just keep working at it
bit by bit work our way through and uh
we'll uh we'll get there at the end all
right thank you everybody you have a
good week and we'll talk to you soon
appreciate it bye bye